docs: document ES|QL Fast mode toggle for approximation (#7141) (#7143)
elastic/docs-content: explore-analyze/query-filter/languages/esql-kibana.md

The {{esql}} editor autocompletes supported settings and validates their values. Settings particularly useful from {{kib}} include:

> - [`approximation`](#approximation-fast-mode): Trade exact results for speed on large `STATS` queries using random sampling. The {{kib}} UI exposes this as the [Fast mode](#approximation-fast-mode) toggle.

Author: ```suggestion
- [`approximation`](#approximation-fast-mode): Trade exact results for speed on large `STATS` queries using random sampling. Several {{kib}} apps expose this functionality with a [Fast mode](#approximation-fast-mode) UI option.
```

{applies_to}`stack: preview 9.5` When querying a [wired stream](/solutions/observability/streams/wired-streams.md) and the editor detects an unknown column error, a **Load unmapped fields** quick fix is available. Select it to apply `SET unmapped_fields = "LOAD";` automatically. Refer to [Query unmapped fields](/solutions/observability/streams/wired-streams.md#streams-wired-streams-discover-unmapped) for wired stream–specific details.

> ## Get faster results with Fast mode [approximation-fast-mode]

Author: ```suggestion
## Get faster results with approximate `STATS` [approximation-fast-mode]
```

```{applies_to}
stack: preview 9.4
serverless: preview
```

On large datasets, you can trade exact results for speed by enabling [approximate results](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/esql-query-approximation.md) for [`STATS`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/commands/processing-commands.md#esql-stats-by) queries. Enable approximation from the {{kib}} UI with **Fast mode**, or from within a query with the [`SET approximation`](#esql-kibana-approximation) directive.

### Turn Fast mode on or off [esql-kibana-fast-mode-toggle]
```{applies_to}
stack: preview 9.5
serverless: preview
```

> Fast mode is the {{kib}} UI control for {{esql}} approximation. Select the {icon}`bolt` Fast mode button next to the query bar, then use the toggle in the popover. Where it applies depends on the context:

Author: ```suggestion
Fast mode is the {{kib}} UI control for {{esql}} approximation. Look for the {icon}`bolt` **Fast mode** option to turn it on. Where it applies depends on the context:
```

> ### Turn Fast mode on or off [esql-kibana-fast-mode-toggle]

Author: ```suggestion
### Use Fast mode [esql-kibana-fast-mode-toggle]
```

> - In [**Discover**](/explore-analyze/discover/try-esql.md), in {{esql}} mode, the button is always available, but Fast mode applies only to queries that use exactly one `STATS` command.

Author: ```suggestion
- In [**Discover**](/explore-analyze/discover/try-esql.md), in {{esql}} mode, the button is always available, but **Fast mode** applies only to queries that use exactly one `STATS` command.
```

> - In [**Dashboards**](/explore-analyze/visualize/esorql.md), Fast mode applies to {{esql}} visualizations that use `STATS`. The button is disabled when the dashboard has no such visualization.

Author: ```suggestion
- In [**Dashboards**](/explore-analyze/visualize/esorql.md), **Fast mode** applies to all {{esql}} visualizations of the dashboard that use one `STATS` command. The option is not available when the dashboard has no such visualization.
```

> Turning Fast mode on doesn't force approximation: {{es}} still runs your query exactly when sampling wouldn't help, such as when a selective filter already narrows the matching data. Estimated results can also vary between runs and might drop low-frequency groups.

Author: ```suggestion
Turning **Fast mode** on doesn't force approximation: {{es}} still runs your query exactly when it wouldn't help, such as when the queried data set is small enough or when a selective filter already narrows the matching data. Estimated results can also vary between runs and might drop low-frequency groups.
```

> In **Dashboards**, Fast mode is saved with the dashboard and preserved when you share a dashboard or a Discover {{esql}} query.

Author: ```suggestion
**Fast mode** is preserved when you save or share a dashboard or a Discover {{esql}} query.
```

To override the toggle for a single query, use the [`SET approximation`](#esql-kibana-approximation) directive.

> ### Approximate `STATS` results with `SET approximation` [esql-kibana-approximation]

Author: ```suggestion
### Use the `SET approximation` directive [esql-kibana-approximation]
```

For supported aggregation functions, output columns, tuning options, and limitations, refer to [Approximate `STATS` queries](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/esql-query-approximation.md).

### Interpret approximate results [esql-kibana-approximation-columns]

An approximate query returns your usual `STATS` columns, plus two extra columns for each approximated value, where `<column>` is the name of the approximated column (for example, `_approximation_confidence_interval(count)`):

- `_approximation_confidence_interval(<column>)`: The range that the exact value is very likely to fall within (with a 90% confidence level). For example, an estimated count of `769` shown with `[759, 779]` means the exact count is very likely between 759 and 779. A narrower range means a more precise estimate. It's empty when no range can be computed, and zero-width (such as `[769, 769]`) when the result is actually exact.
- `_approximation_certified(<column>)`: Whether the estimate passed the statistical checks behind the confidence interval. `true` means the interval is reliable. `false` means the estimate might still be accurate, but the interval couldn't be fully validated.

> {applies_to}`{stack: "preview 9.5", serverless: "preview"}` In [**Discover**](/explore-analyze/discover/try-esql.md), these appear as additional columns in the results table. For more details, refer to [Approximate `STATS` queries](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/esql-query-approximation.md).

Author: ```suggestion
{applies_to}`{stack: "preview 9.5", serverless: "preview"}` In [**Discover**](/explore-analyze/discover/try-esql.md), these appear as additional columns in the results table. 

For more details, refer to [Approximate `STATS` queries](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/esql-query-approximation.md).
```

{applies_to}`stack: preview 9.5` When querying a [wired stream](/solutions/observability/streams/wired-streams.md) and the editor detects an unknown column error, a **Load unmapped fields** quick fix is available. Select it to apply `SET unmapped_fields = "LOAD";` automatically. Refer to [Query unmapped fields](/solutions/observability/streams/wired-streams.md#streams-wired-streams-discover-unmapped) for wired stream–specific details.

## Get faster results with approximate `STATS` [approximation-fast-mode]
```{applies_to}
stack: preview 9.4
serverless: preview
```

> On large datasets, you can trade exact results for speed by enabling [approximate results](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/esql-query-approximation.md) for [`STATS`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/commands/processing-commands.md#esql-stats-by) queries. Enable approximation from the {{kib}} UI with **Fast mode**, or from within a query with the [`SET approximation`](#esql-kibana-approximation) directive.

Reviewer: > Enable approximation from the {{kib}} UI with **Fast mode**,

Is this correct? We dont have it at 9.4

Author: That's the general introduction, the specific fast mode section is tagged as 9.5, I'm just not repeating the tags everywhere to keep this readable - but i'll clarify

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/7143/commits/4013d4babac78b94c4949791e88125df2361fc97

> On large datasets, you can trade exact results for speed by enabling [approximate results](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/esql-query-approximation.md) for [`STATS`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/commands/processing-commands.md#esql-stats-by) queries. Enable approximation from the {{kib}} UI with **Fast mode**, or from within a query with the [`SET approximation`](#esql-kibana-approximation) directive.

Reviewer 2: @florent-leborgne can we briefly explain somewhere that approximation uses sampling and then performs some calculations to extrapolate the results to the whole dataset making the final numbers very close to the real ones?

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/7143/commits/784008a3c7770b2e5c5558b3ccb98d46618d2003

> However you enable it, approximation isn't forced: {{es}} runs your query exactly when approximation wouldn't make it faster, such as when a selective filter has already narrowed the matching data. Approximate results are estimates, so they can vary between runs and might drop low-frequency groups. Refer to [Approximate `STATS` queries](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/esql-query-approximation.md) for details.

Reviewer 2: @florent-leborgne  It took me a while to understand this sentence

> However you enable it, approximation isn't forced: {{es}} runs your query exactly when approximation wouldn't make it faster, such as when a selective filter has already narrowed the matching data

Can we reword it to something like this?

> However you enable it, approximation isn't forced: {{es}} runs approximation only when it makes sense. For example when the document count is very big: >1M rows for STATS .. BY queries or >100k rows for other STATS queries. If the document count is small, approximation won't take any effect and the exact results will be returned. Also, approximation won't be for some aggregations like COUNT_DISTINCT, MAX, MIN or LAST even if the Fast mode switch is ON or if you SET it in the query. Read about all exceptions and use cases here (https://docs-v3-preview.elastic.dev/elastic/elasticsearch/tree/main/reference/query-languages/esql/esql-query-approximation).

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/7143/commits/784008a3c7770b2e5c5558b3ccb98d46618d2003

### Use Fast mode [esql-kibana-fast-mode-toggle]
```{applies_to}
stack: preview 9.5
serverless: preview
```

> Fast mode is the {{kib}} UI control for {{esql}} approximation. Look for the {icon}`bolt` **Fast mode** option to turn it on. Where it applies depends on the context:

Reviewer 2: @florent-leborgne can we have a screenshot here so the user knows what to look for?

Author: Definitely going to add one, I'm just waiting that the option becomes available on one of the instances I have with nice dashboards already defined (so likely just before i merge the PR when the feature goes live)

- In [**Discover**](/explore-analyze/discover/try-esql.md), in {{esql}} mode, the button is always available, but **Fast mode** applies only to queries that use exactly one `STATS` command.

> - In [**Dashboards**](/explore-analyze/visualize/esorql.md), **Fast mode** applies to all {{esql}} visualizations of the dashboard that use one `STATS` command. The option is not available when the dashboard has no such visualization.

Reviewer: Kinda wrong, I am enabling it when there is at least one ES|QL visualization but I am not testing if it has STATS (we could do it for V2)

Reviewer 2: Yes, the button is disabled if the dashboard doesn't contain any ES|QL visualization

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/7143/commits/4013d4babac78b94c4949791e88125df2361fc97

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/7143/commits/784008a3c7770b2e5c5558b3ccb98d46618d2003

> **Fast mode** is preserved when you save or share a dashboard or a Discover {{esql}} query.

Reviewer: Fast mode is not preserved when save a Discover session. It will be on v2

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/7143/commits/4013d4babac78b94c4949791e88125df2361fc97

{applies_to}`stack: preview 9.5` When querying a [wired stream](/solutions/observability/streams/wired-streams.md) and the editor detects an unknown column error, a **Load unmapped fields** quick fix is available. Select it to apply `SET unmapped_fields = "LOAD";` automatically. Refer to [Query unmapped fields](/solutions/observability/streams/wired-streams.md#streams-wired-streams-discover-unmapped) for wired stream–specific details.

## Get faster results with approximate `STATS` [approximation-fast-mode]
```{applies_to}
stack: preview 9.4
serverless: preview
```

> On large datasets, you can trade exact results for speed by enabling [approximate results](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/esql-query-approximation.md) for [`STATS`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/commands/processing-commands.md#esql-stats-by) queries. Approximation runs your `STATS` aggregations on a sample of the data and extrapolates to estimate results for the full dataset, so the numbers come out close to the exact ones. You can enable approximation in two ways:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On large datasets, you can trade exact results for speed by enabling [approximate results](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/esql-query-approximation.md) for [`STATS`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/commands/processing-commands.md#esql-stats-by) queries. Approximation runs your `STATS` aggregations on a sample of the data and extrapolates to estimate results for the full dataset. You can enable approximation in two ways:
```
I think the part I removed is covered by saying it's estimating results.

Author: Hmm yes I see what you mean; I'll keep it as it's a bit of a tricky topic

- {applies_to}`{stack: "preview 9.5", serverless: "preview"}` From the {{kib}} UI, with [Fast mode](#esql-kibana-fast-mode-toggle).
- From within a query, with the [`SET approximation`](#esql-kibana-approximation) directive.

> However you enable it, {{es}} applies approximation only when it speeds up the query. When your data is smaller than the sample size (by default around 1 million rows for `STATS ... BY` queries and 100,000 rows for other `STATS` queries), or a filter has already narrowed the results, {{es}} returns exact results instead. Approximation also covers only certain aggregations, so functions such as `COUNT_DISTINCT`, `MIN`, `MAX`, and `LAST` always run exactly. Because approximate results are estimates, they can vary between runs and might drop low-frequency groups. For the full conditions and supported functions, refer to [Approximate `STATS` queries](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/esql-query-approximation.md).

Author: ```suggestion
However you enable it, {{es}} applies approximation only when it actually speeds up the query. When your data is smaller than the sample size (by default around 1 million rows for `STATS ... BY` queries and 100,000 rows for other `STATS` queries), or a filter has already narrowed the results, {{es}} returns exact results instead. Approximation also covers only certain aggregations, so functions such as `COUNT_DISTINCT`, `MIN`, `MAX`, and `LAST` always run exactly. Because approximate results are estimates, they can vary between runs and might drop low-frequency groups. For the full conditions and supported functions, refer to [Approximate `STATS` queries](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/esql-query-approximation.md).
```

> However you enable it, {{es}} applies approximation only when it actually speeds up the query. When your data is smaller than the sample size (by default around 1 million rows for `STATS ... BY` queries and 100,000 rows for other `STATS` queries), or a filter has already narrowed the results, {{es}} returns exact results instead. Approximation also covers only certain aggregations, so functions such as `COUNT_DISTINCT`, `MIN`, `MAX`, and `LAST` always run exactly. Because approximate results are estimates, they can vary between runs and might drop low-frequency groups. For the full conditions and supported functions, refer to [Approximate `STATS` queries](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/esql-query-approximation.md).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However you enable it, {{es}} applies approximation only when it actually speeds up the query. When your data is smaller than the sample size (by default around 1 million rows for `STATS ... BY` queries and 100,000 rows for other `STATS` queries), or a filter has already narrowed the results, {{es}} returns exact results instead. Approximation only works with certain aggregations, so functions such as `COUNT_DISTINCT`, `MIN`, `MAX`, and `LAST` always run exactly. Because approximate results are estimates, they can vary between runs and might drop low-frequency groups. For the full conditions and supported functions, refer to [Approximate `STATS` queries](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/esql-query-approximation.md).
```
Is there a difference between "aggregations" and "functions" in this paragraph? I see we use "aggregation functions" on line 496.

Author: aggregations is more of a subset of techniques, while functions is the technical syntax term. (Some functions are made to do aggregations, other functions for other things)

### Use Fast mode [esql-kibana-fast-mode-toggle]
```{applies_to}
stack: preview 9.5
serverless: preview
```

> Fast mode is the {{kib}} UI control for {{esql}} approximation. Look for the {icon}`bolt` **Fast mode** option to turn it on. Where it applies depends on the context:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Fast mode is the {{kib}} UI control for {{esql}} approximation. Select the {icon}`bolt` **Fast mode** option to turn it on. Where it applies depends on the context:
```
Should we say select here? Not exactly sure the process to turn it on.

Author: yeah there's a button that displays a small popup with a toggle on it. You suggestion works I'll take it 👍
